20231020 - 17:21

Status: #idea

Tags:

# Tips for logic exam
There are a number of questions in the exam that are always the same. These questions always require the same type of response, so the best way is simply to learn how these should be answered. 

1. Give proofs of natural deduction of the following sequents: 
	1. These questions can be solved using the rules for natural deduction. If one ever gets stuck try using proof by contradiction or LEM (when doing LEM this will usually be applied only to one variable). Also don't be afraid to introduce variables which contradict each other.  In these cases it's also smart to look at what one wants the expression to solve to and then work from there. Another tip is to consider which order different assumptions can be made. When working with a $\lor$ and implication it can be smart to consider which of these operations should be done first. 
	
2. Without using truth tables, find a valuation that makes the following formula false, explain how you arrived at your solution. 
	1. These question will generally take on one of two different forms, either there will be a  $\wedge$ or a $\vee$. In the former case these have to be solved by finding a valuation which makes one of the conjuncts False (or True), in the latter a valuation which makes all of them false has to be found. The easiest way of approaching this is by starting with the simplest disjunct. Setting those values and then working from there. This will usually mean the other values fall into place, though note that this is not always the case. When motivating this simply state the process which was taken to land at this result. Here follows a example:
	2. "For the formula to be false, all three parts of the disjunction need to be false.All three subformulas are implications and for an implication to be false then the condition needs to be true while the conclusion has to be false. So, for the leftmost subformula to be false then p needs to be true and q $\wedge$ r needsto be false. For the middle subformula to be false then q $\wedge$ p needs to be true and r $\wedge$ s needs to be false.Putting things together we get that q should also be true (hence p $\wedge$ q is true) and r should be false (making both q $\wedge$ r and r $\wedge$ s false).Finally, for the rightmost subformula to be false then s should be true and p $\wedge$ q $\rightarrow$ r should be false, which is indeed the case with the values we have already assigned to p, q and r."

3. For each of the sequents below, prove using natural deduction that they are valid, or give a counter-model showing that they are not. 
	1. First try to find a model where this is not valid. This will hopefully be easier than doing the natural deduction. To find a non valid model there are two general ways I like approaching it. The first one is to consider numbers which we already know, like the natural numbers, and from that try to conclude what the correct result should be. The second option is to consider a very small case, usually two elements will suffice, but there might even be cases where 1 element is enough. Also remember that we are looking for 1 counter model, if we can find 1 counter model that means that the sequent is invalid. 
	2. When arguing this make sure to be clear enough. Here is a answer from the exam: "The sequent is not valid. We will give a counter-model. Consider A = N, $P^M$ the set of even numbers, and $Q^M$ the set of odd numbers. In this model the premise holds since it is indeed the case that not all numbers are even or all numbers are odd. On the other hand there is no number which is neither even nor odd."
	3. On the other hand if there seems to be no valid counter model it is time to do natural deduction. This is similar to the problems solved in problem 1, the only difference being that we now have new quantifiers. These also have rules connected to them. Work in a similar way to problem 1. Here it is extremely important to remember that when applying a function to a element in our universe, all that is returned is another element in that universe. By extension this means that if something holds for all x, that will ofcourse hold for f(x) too, as f(x) will just be another element in our universe.
	4. Here is another answer when giving a counter-model. Consider A = {0,1,2}, $A^M$ = {0} and $B^M$ = {0,1}. Here we have that the premise $\forall x(A(x) \rightarrow B(x))$ is satisfiable in the model since for all elements a in the domain, whenever $a \in A^M$ we also have $a \in B^M$. We also have that $\exists A(x)$ is satisfiable in the model since $0 \in A^M$. On the other hand it is not the case that $\forall x.B(x)$ is satisfiable in the model since $\not\in B^M$. 
	
4. Consider the following sematic entailments. What is a model for the language? Explain semantically (that is, reasoning with models) whether the above entailments hold or not. 
		1. This is a question which is part of every exam, so listen up! The answer always starts in the same way. "A model M for the language consists in a domain A $\neq \emptyset$ an element $p^M \in A$, one unary relation $R^M \subset A$ and two binary relations $P^M, Q^M \subseteq A \times A$"
	1. For the second part we will get a number of semantic entailments. Here we apply the same approach as in question 3. We will either find a counter model, or we will have to argue semantically. These questions are usually a little more complicated so make sure one has checked many different approaches to reasoning. Remember if we find 1 case where the semantic entailment is not valid we are done. A good approach is to find a weak point in the conclusion. When arguing that something is not correct this is the approach used in the exam: "The entailment is not valid. Consider a model M with domain A = N, $R^M$ the property of being an even natural number, $P^M$ being such that $(y,x) \subset P^M$ if 2y = x and $p^m$ being any odd natural number, say 5. In this model the premise is valid since every even number x is a multiple of 2. On the other hand the conclusion is not valid since 5 is not a multiple of 2 and also it is not the case that none natural number is even."
	2. When reasoning that a semantical entailment is valid we will approach it in a similar way. Here is a answer from the exam. The entailment is valid. Consider a model M such that M semantically entail the premise. This tells us that for all a $\in$ A $(a,a)\in P^M$ or for all $b \in A, (a,b) \in Q^M$ So for any $a \in A$ we have either that $(a,a) \in P^M$ and then we know that there exists a $b \in A$ such that $(a,b) \in P^M$ or $(a,b) \in Q^M$ for any $b \in A$ so in particular when b = a we then have $(a,a) \in Q^M$. Hence the conclusion is valid in this model. 
	3. One good thing to remember here is that $M \models \neg P$ is the same as $M \not\models P$. This can be used to make proofs more concrete. Another good thing to keep in mind is that = also has to be defined. 
	
5. Consider a language with one constant symbol leaf, one binary function symbol branch and one unary function symbol rev. What is the model for this language? 
	1. This answer will be very similar to the first question in 4. Here we will reason that we have a model with a set which is not the empty set. And then the constants will be in a. The functions will be a mapping from A x ... (depending on the arity) to A, and the realation will be a subset of A. Here we also consider different models. 
	
6. For a function to have a least and a gratest fixpoint it has to be monotone. We then compute these two fixpoints. This is done be smartly considering which values will make our function become small and large. For some context, the definition of a fixpoint is a value which when applied to a formula gives the same value. Like f(x) = x. Monotone means that a function either always increases or always decreases. If it gives same value that is ok. 

7. Explain what is a model of LTL. THIS IS ANOTHER QUESTION WHICH IS ALWAYS ASKED. "A model of LTL is given by a finite transition system S, $\to$ such that for any state s there is a s' with s $\to$ s' and with labelling function L, where L(s) is the set of atomic formulae valid at state s." There is usually a question regarding if a LTL formula is valid. In this case we will consider a $\pi$ so that $\pi \models$ the left side of the implication. We then say that p is valid at time m and q valid at time n. Then try depending of which of these is true first, and try concluding if the right side of the implication is true in both cases. 

8. These questions are same as 7. Remember to consider a path $\pi$. Don't forget to apply L to this. So p is not in $L(\pi(0))$. Note that this means the truth value of p in step 0 of the path $\pi$. 

9. This questions is the same as 8 but here we instead look at CTL. This is similar to LTL but the big difference is that instead of reasoning about paths we reason about states. A answer might look like this: "The formula is not valid. Consider a model with two states, s0, s1 with s0 $\to$ s1 and s1 $\to$ s1, p holds only at s0 and 1 holds only at s1. We have AF(p) and AF(q) at s0 but not $AF(p \land q$) in s0. "


\-\-\-
# References